Untitled Document

Mr. Claro -- Modern Nonfiction
Reading Selection by Joan Didion
Holy Water

JOAN DIDION is a fifth-generation Californian, born in Sacramento (1934), who took her B.A. at
Berkeley and lives in Los Angeles. Between college and marriage
to the writer John Gregory Dunne, she lived in New York for seven years, where she worked as an editor
for Vogue and wrote essays for the National Review and the Saturday Evening Post. In California,
Didion and Dunne separately write novels and magazine articles and collaborate on screenplays.
Didion's novels are Run River (1963), Play It as It Lays (1970), A Book of Common Prayer (1977), and
Democracy (1984). Her collections of essays are Slouching Towards Bethlehem (1968), The White
Album (1979), from which we have taken this selection, and After Henry (1992). She published Salvador
in 1983, in 1987 Miami.
Joan Didion is one of our best nonfiction writers. She describes the alien, simple California she grew up
in and the southern California where she now lives - a landscape of drive-ins and orange groves, ocean
and freeway, the Manson murders and ordinary, domestic, adulterous homicide. She has done witness to
the turmoils of the decades, especially the sixties - drugs, Vietnam, and personal breakdown. Expertly
sensitive and inventive with language, she is most talented in the representation of hysteria. While her
book about El Salvador mentions politics, it is essentially the record of a sensibility, sensitive to fear,
exposed to an atmosphere that engenders it: "Terror is the given of the place."
Much of Didion's journalism derives from interviews. She has written of herself:
"My only advantage as a reporter is that I am so physically small, so temperamentally unobtrusive, and
so neurotically inarticulate that people tend to forget that my presence runs counter to their best
interests. And it always does. That is one last thing to remember: writers are always selling somebody
out."

In an essay called "Why I Write," she remembers how she tried to think in abstractions when she was an
undergraduate at the University of California. "I failed. My attention veered inexorably back to the
specific, to the tangible. . . . I would try to contemplate the Hegelian dialectic and would find myself
concentrating instead on a flowering pear tree outside my window." She was a particularist, not an
abstractionist; finally, her particulars are not the world outside the window but the words she puts on
the page. She is a writer, obsessed by the language she manipulates: "Grammar is a piano I play by
ear. . . . All I know about grammar is its infinite power. To shift the structure of a sentence alters the
meaning of that sentence, as definitely and inflexibly as the position of a camera alters the meaning of
the object photographed."

file:///C|/Documents%20and%20Settings/Joe%20Claro/My...OL/gr%2012%2003-04/Nonfic%20pieces/Didion/Didion.htm (1 of 6)11/18/2005 4:26:57 PM

Untitled Document

Some of us who live in arid parts of the world think about water with a reverence others might find
excessive. The water I will draw tomorrow from my tap in Malibu is today crossing the Mojave Desert
from the Colorado River, and I like to think about exactly where that water is. The water I will drink
tonight in a restaurant in Hollywood is by now well down the Los Angeles Aqueduct from the Owens
River, and I also think about exactly where that water is: I particularly like to imagine it as it cascades
down the 45-degree stone steps that aerate Owens water after its airless passage through the mountain
pipes and siphons. As it happens my own reverence for water has always taken the form of this constant
meditation upon where the water is, of an obsessive interest not in the politics of water but in the
waterworks themselves, in the movement of water through aqueducts and siphons and pumps and
forebays and afterbays and weirs and drains, in plumbing on the grand scale. I know the data on water
projects I will never see. I know the difficulty Kaiser had closing the last two sluiceway gates on the
Gun Dam in Venezuela. I keep watch on evaporation behind the Aswan in Egypt. I can put myself to
sleep imagining the water dropping a thousand feet into the turbines at Churchill Falls in Labrador. If the
Churchill Falls Project fails to materialize, I fall back on waterworks closer at hand - the tailrace at
Hoover on the Colorado, the surge tank in the Tehachapi Mountains that receives California Aqueduct
water pumped higher than water has ever been pumped before - and finally I replay a morning when I
was seventeen years old and caught, in a military-surplus life raft, in the construction of the Nimbus
Afterbay Dam on the American River near Sacramento. I remember that at the moment it happened I
was trying to open a tin of anchovies with capers. I recall the raft spinning into the narrow chute through
which the river had been temporarily diverted. I recall being deliriously happy.

I suppose it was partly the memory of that delirium that led me to visit, one summer morning in
Sacramento, the Operations Control Center for the California State Water Project. Actually so much
water is moved around California by so many different agencies that maybe only the movers themselves
know on any given day whose water is where, but to get a general picture it is necessary only to
remember that Los Angeles moves some of it, San Francisco moves some of it, the Bureau of
Reclamation's Central Valley Project moves some of it, and the California State Water Project moves
most of the rest of it, moves a vast amount of it, moves more water farther than has ever been moved
anywhere. They collect this water up in the granite keeps of the Sierra Nevada and they store roughly a
trillion gallons of it behind the Oroville Dam and every morning, down at the Project's headquarters in
Sacramento, they decide how much of their water they want to move the next day. They make this
morning decision according to supply and demand, which is simple in theory but rather more
complicated in practice. In theory each of the Project's five field divisions - the Oroville, the Delta, the
San Luis, the San Joaquin, and the Southern divisions - places a call to headquarters before nine AM.
and tells the dispatchers how much water is needed by its local water contractors, who have in turn
based their morning estimates on orders from growers and other big users. A schedule is made. The
gages open and close according to schedule. The water flows south and the deliveries are made.

In practice this requires prodigious coordination, precision, and the best efforts of several human minds
file:///C|/Documents%20and%20Settings/Joe%20Claro/My...OL/gr%2012%2003-04/Nonfic%20pieces/Didion/Didion.htm (2 of 6)11/18/2005 4:26:57 PM

Untitled Document

and that of a Univac 418. In practice it might be necessary to hold large flows of water for power
production, or to flush out encroaching salinity in the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta, the most
ecologically sensitive point on the system. In practice a sudden rain might obviate the need for a
delivery when that delivery is already on its way. In practice what is being delivered here is an enormous
volume of water, not quarts of milk or spools of thread, and it takes two days to move such a delivery
down through Oroville into the Delta, which is the great pooling place for California water and has been
for some years alive with electronic sensors and telemetering equipment and men blocking channels and
diverting flows and shoveling fish away from the pumps. It takes perhaps another six days to move this
same water down the California Aqueduct from the Delta to the Tehachapi and put it over the hill to
Southern California. "Putting some over the hill" is what they say around the Project Operations Control
Center when they want to indicate that they are pumping Aqueduct water from the floor of the San
Joaquin Valley up and over the Tehachapi Mountains. "Pulling it down" is what they say when they
want to indicate that they are lowering a water level somewhere in the system. They can put some over
the hill by remote control from this room in Sacramento with its Univac and its big board and its
flashing lights. They can pull down a pool in the San Joaquin by remote control from this room in
Sacramento with its locked doors and its ringing alarms and its constant printouts of data from sensors
out there in the water itself. From this room in Sacramento the whole system takes on the aspect of a
perfect three-billion-dollar hydraulic toy, and in certain ways it is. "LET'S START DRAINING QUAIL
AT 12:00" was the 10:51 A.M. entry on the electronically recorded communications log the day I visited
the Operations Control Center. "Quail" is a reservoir in Los Angeles County with a gross capacity of
1,636,018,000 gallons. "OK" was the response recorded in the log. I knew at that moment that I had
missed the only vocation for which I had any instinctive affinity: I wanted to drain Quail myself.
Not many people I know carry their end of the conversation when I want to talk about water deliveries,
even when I stress that these deliveries affect their lives, indirectly, every day. "Indirectly" is not quite
enough for most people I know. This morning, however, several people I know were affected not
"indirectly" but "directly" by the way the water moves. They had been in New Mexico shooting a
picture, one sequence of which required a river deep enough to sink a truck, the kind with a cab and a
trailer and fifty or sixty wheels. It so happened that no river near the New Mexico location was running
that deep this year. The production was therefore moved today to Needles, California, where the
Colorado River normally runs, depending upon releases from Davis Dam, eighteen to twenty-five feet
deep. Now. Follow this closely: Yesterday we had a freak tropical storm in Southern California, two
inches of rain in a normally dry month, and because this rain flooded the fields and provided more
irrigation than any grower could possibly want for several days, no water was ordered from Davis Dam.

No orders, no releases.

Supply and demand.

As a result the Colorado was running only seven feet deep past Needles today, Sam Peckinpah's" desire
file:///C|/Documents%20and%20Settings/Joe%20Claro/My...OL/gr%2012%2003-04/Nonfic%20pieces/Didion/Didion.htm (3 of 6)11/18/2005 4:26:57 PM

Untitled Document

for eighteen feet of water in which to sink a truck not being the kind of demand anyone at Davis Dam is
geared to meet. The production closed down for the weekend. Shooting will resume Tuesday, providing
some grower orders water and the agencies controlling the Colorado release it. Meanwhile many gaffers,
best boys, cameramen, assistant directors, script supervisors, stunt drivers, and maybe even Sam
Peckinpah are waiting out the weekend in Needles, where it is often 110 degrees at five P.M. and hard to
get dinner after eight. This is a California parable, but a true one.
Sam Peckinpah American film director (1925-1984).

I have always wanted a swimming pool, and never had one. When it became generally known a year or
so ago that California was suffering severe drought, many people in water-rich parts of the country
seemed obscurely gratified, and made frequent reference to Californians having to brick up their
swimming pools. In fact a swimming pool requires, once it has been filled and the filter has begun its
process of cleaning and recirculating the water, virtually no water, but the symbolic content of
swimming pools has always been interesting: A pool is misapprehended as a trapping of affluence, real
or pretended, and of a kind of hedonistic attention to the body. Actually a pool is, for many of us in the
West, a symbol not of affluence but of order, of control over the uncontrollable. A pool is water, made
available and useful, and is, as such, infinitely soothing to the western eye.

It is easy to forget that the only natural force over which we have any control out here is water, and that
only recently In my memory California summers were characterized by the coughing in the pipes that
meant the well was dry, and California winters by all-night watches on rivers about to crest, by
sandbagging, by dynamite on the levees, and flooding on the first floor. Even now the place is not all
that hospitable to extensive settlement. As I write a fire has been burning out of control for two weeks in
the ranges behind the Big Sur coast. Flash floods last night wiped out all major roads into Imperial
County. I noticed this morning a hairline crack in a living-room tile from last week's earthquake, a 4.4 I
never felt. In the part of California where I now live aridity is the single most prominent feature of the
climate, and I am not pleased to see, this year, cactus spreading wild to the sea. There will be days this
winter when the humidity will drop to ten, seven, four. Tumbleweed will blow against my house and the
sound of the rattlesnake will be duplicated a hundred times a day by dried bougainvillea drifting in my
driveway. The apparent ease of California life is an illusion, and those who believe the illusion real live
here in only the most temporary way. I know as well as the next person that there is considerable
transcendent value in a river running wild and undammed, a river running free over granite, but I have
also lived beneath such a river when it was running in flood, and gone without showers when it was
running dry.
"The West begins," Bernard DeVoto wrote, "where the average annual io rainfall drops below twenty
inches." This is maybe the best definition of the West I have ever read, and it goes a long way toward
explaining my own passion for seeing the water under control, but many people I know persist in
looking for psychoanalytical implications in this passion. As a matter of fact I have explored, in an
amateur way, the more obvious of these implications, and come up with nothing interesting. A certain
external reality remains, and resists interpretation. The West begins where the average annual rainfall
file:///C|/Documents%20and%20Settings/Joe%20Claro/My...OL/gr%2012%2003-04/Nonfic%20pieces/Didion/Didion.htm (4 of 6)11/18/2005 4:26:57 PM

Untitled Document

drops below twenty inches. Water is important to people who do not have it, and the same is true of
control. Some fifteen years ago I tore a poem by Karl Shapiro from a magazine and pinned it on my
kitchen wall. This fragment of paper is now on the wall of a sixth kitchen, and crumbles a little
whenever I touch it, but I keep it there for the last stanza, which has for me the power of a prayer:

It is raining in California, a straight rain
Cleaning the heavy oranges on the bough,
Filling the gardens till the gardens flow,
Shining the olives, tiling the gleaming tile,
Waxing the dark camellia leaves more green,
flooding the daylong valleys like the Nile.
I thought of those lines constantly on the morning in Sacramento when I went to visit the California
State Water Project Operations Control Center. If I had wanted to drain Quail at 10:51 that morning, I
wanted, by early afternoon, to do a great deal more. I wanted to open and close the Clifton Court
Forebay intake gate. I wanted to produce some power down at the San Luis Dam. I wanted to pick a
pool at random on the Aqueduct and pull it down and then refill it, watching for the hydraulic jump. I
wanted to put some water over the hill and I wanted to shut down all flow from the Aqueduct into the
Bureau of Reclamation's Cross Valley Canal, just to see how long it would take somebody over at
Reclamation to call up and complain. I stayed as long as I could and watched the system work on the big
board with the lighted checkpoints. The Delta salinity report was coming in on one of the teletypes
behind me. The Delta tidal report was coming in on another. The earthquake board, which has been
desensitized to sound its alarm (a beeping tone for Southern California, a high-pitched tone for the
north) only for those earthquakes which register at least 3.0 on the Richter Scale, was silent. I had no
further business in this room and yet I wanted to stay the day. I wanted to be the one, that day, who was
shining the olives, filling the gardens, and flooding the daylong valleys like the Nile. I want it still.

AFTERWORD
Somewhere Didion writes: "A place belongs forever to whoever claims it hardest, remembers it most
obsessively, wrenches it from itself, shapes it, renders it, loves it so radically that he really makes it in
his image." Whatever she speaks of, she will always discover the extreme; the middle way does not
interest her. (Even as a child, "I can recall disapproving of the golden mean. . . .") Surely we can imagine
a middling essay on water, all statistics and predictions, which would interest nobody. Information in
"Holy Water" supplies a frame, and we would miss it if it were not there, but it is not the essay's heart.
With Didion, information is the ephemeral flesh; feeling is the skeleton that endures. She will not work
herself up to write unless "the extremes show up.
This extremity is a matter of personal feeling, it requires the letter "I." Feeling requires someone to do it.
In her essay called "Why I Write," Didion says, "In many ways writing is the act of saying I, of
imposing oneself on people, of saying listen to me, see it my way, change your mind."

file:///C|/Documents%20and%20Settings/Joe%20Claro/My...OL/gr%2012%2003-04/Nonfic%20pieces/Didion/Didion.htm (5 of 6)11/18/2005 4:26:57 PM

Untitled Document

BOOKS AVAILABLE IN PAPERBACK
After Henry. New York: Random House-Vintage. Essays.
Play It as It Lays. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux. Novel.
Run River. New York: Random House-Vintage. Novel.
Salvador. New York: Random House-Vintage. Nonfiction.
Slouching Towards Bethlehem. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux. Essays.
The White Album. New York: Farrar, Straus & Giroux. Essays.

file:///C|/Documents%20and%20Settings/Joe%20Claro/My...OL/gr%2012%2003-04/Nonfic%20pieces/Didion/Didion.htm (6 of 6)11/18/2005 4:26:57 PM

