JOAN DlDIO\i

MAKING UP STORIES

Le t me present you with a chain of associations.
I am delivering the 1979 Hopwood Lec ture at the University
of Michigan in Ann Arbor, Michigan, near the city of Detroit.
When Detroit is mentioned I think reflexively of my father.
I have never before yesterday been in Detroit but my father was
stationed there , the last year of World War II. Whe n he came
home to California from Detroit he brought me three handkerchiefs of a very heavy silk twill , one brown , o ne orange, the
third a quite brilliant eme rald green . He had bought these
handkerchiefs at the J.L. Hudson Company and the saleswoman
had told him that "all the young girls" were wearing them ,
knotted around the neck.
I was undone by this present, for several reasons : one was
that I was only ten, and overcome that my father should consider
m e a "young girl," should buy me a grown-up present, a present
of something "in fashion ." The pieces of silk seemed to me
incredibly g lamorous and beautiful , and they were rendered
even more so by the fact that this was th e first time my father
had ever had occasion to buy me-all by himse lf, without my
mother-a present.
I rem e mber that we sat down to lunch .
I remember that we had cracked crab, although there "remains
some question about this. I may have invented the crab, you
ne ver know.
I definitely reme mbe r that we had iced tea, in a silve r pitcher,
b ecause I picked up this pitcher to pour myself some tea-more
evidence that I was grown up , a "young girl" instead of a little
gi rl-and I sp illed it.
This s pilling of the tea was a ve ry fraught moment-anyone
old enough to w ear silk handkerchiefs knotted around her neck

521

THE ~lICHICAN QU-\RTERLY REVIEW

a nd drink iced tt'a \\.:as too old to drop the pitc her-amI
remember bolting from the table, running to Illy room and
locking the door.
We can call that story " Homecoming, " or we can call it
"Family Life," or we can call it "De troit and Other Sorrows ."
It is not a story I will ever write .
Similarly: When the Hopwood Awards are mentioned I think
reflexively of being an undergraduate at Berkeley and wishing
that Avery Hopwood had left that famous one-fifth of his estate
to the University of California instead of the University of
Michigan . I wanted to win a Hopwood Award . I wanted to win
one not only because the very word "Hopwood" had a bigtime
national sound to it, a kind of certification that the winner was
on the right track, but also because the prize was money , cash,
and I needed it .
I hear the word "Hopwood" and I think of Corinne Benson,
who was my roommate one year at Berkeley . Corinne was from
Marin County and she turned on the radio to a certain station
every night at midnight in order to hear the sign-off, which was
a male tenor singing " The Bluebird of Happiness." She had
blonde hair and blue eyes and many, many powder blue sweaters
to match her eyes, many sweaters and many dresses and many
different-sized bottles of the particular perfume she always
wore.
She le~t me one of her dresses one night , to wear on a date
to San Francisco .
This date was with someone I had met in a writing class.
In other words he was "literary, " as I wanted desperately to
be, and had no car. We went from Berkeley to San Francisco
on the F train and w e ate the inevitable coq au yin at the
inevitable French family restaurant and we saw a play, the
inevitable Restoration comedy .
I do not now remember the play but I remember the dress
and I remember this boy reading Dylan Thomas out loud to
me on the F train back to Berkeley. He gave me a gloss on every
line he read . For example :
.. It teas my thirtieth year to heaven," he would rea cI.

\

JO.\:\1 DIDION

.\nd then he wuuld turn to me and say: "It was his thirtieth
birthday."
And I would nod.
He liked the dress, and asked why I never wore it, and I was
too embarrassed to say that it was not mine. I was so young
that I imagined it shameful to let anyone know that you cared
enough about him to borrow a dress.
"Altarwise by owl-light in the half-way house," he would read,
and then interpret it. I recall thinking that if we only had
Hopwood Awards at Berkeley we might each win one, this boy
and 1, and winning a Hopwood Award would give me enough
money to buy a dress exactly like Corinne's, and give him
enough certification, enough confidence, to ride across San
Francisco Bay without feeling impelled to improve the moment
by giving me an interlinear translation of Dylan Thomas. Had
he known what I was thinking he would have called me bourgeois. This is another story I will never write.
This kind of associating never stops.
Corinne Benson, the trace of her perfume in the borrowed
dress, the particular brilliant colors of those silk handkerchiefs
from J.L. Hudson, the flicker of the lights on the F train at
night, coq au vin, iced tea and the way the moisture condenses
on the outside of a silver pitcher: these are only the skim off
the top of all that floods through my mind when I hear the
words "Detroit" or "Hopwood Awards".
For example, by a chain of associations too tedious to reconstruct, Corinne Benson leads me directly to watching "Splendor
in the Grass" on television, with a drunk psychiatrist from
Louisville, in the Faculty Club at Berkeley on the night Saigon
fell in 1975. The Faculty Club at Berkeley leads me to the stone
tower Robinson Jeffers built at Carmel. Carmel leads me to the
ordination of a Jesuit priest, a summer afternoon in Sacramento,
and the ordination leads me to Santa Fe and to New Haven
and to the murders in Beverly Hills of Sharon Tate Polanski,
Jay Sebring, Voitek Frykowski, Steven Parent, and .-\bigail
Folger.
To give you the connections that take me from Detroit to those

\

J~-l

THE ~IlCHIC.-\N QUARTERLY REVlEW

five murders in California wOllld be to give 1'011 a story of my
whole life, and I say "a story" rather than "the story" deliberately.
I say "a story" because only part of that story would be true.
Some of the story would be a trick of memory.
Elizabeth Hardwick has written a novel, Sleepless Nights, in
which . the subject is memory , and in this novel she wrote :
"Sometimes I resent the glossary, the concordance of truth, many
have about my real life . . . I mean that such fact is to be a
hindrance to memory."
Some of what all of us remember is automatic improvisation,
a scenario invented to link puzzling and contradictory scenes.
When we tell someone a dream we try, in spite of ourselves,
for a certain coherence, a dramatic shape: we interpret the dream
as we tell it, and filter out those details which seem to lead
nowhere. We think of our dreams as stories, but they are not,
at least until we tell them.
In fact the way we think in dreams is also the way we think
when we are awake, all of these images occurring simultaneously, images opening up new images, charging and recharging, until we have a whole field of image, an electric field
pulsing and blazing and taking on the exact character of a
migraine aura.
All of us have this going on in our heads, all the time, this
incessant clatter, this charging and recharging.
Usually we sedate ourselves to keep the clatter down.
And when I say that we sedate ourselves, I don't necessarily
mean with drugs, not at all. Work is a sedative. The love of
children can be a sedative . Planting a garden, locking the doors ,
cooking dinner , arranging the tulips ' in a certain glass and
placing the glass so that the water catches the light : anything
that successfully focuses our attention is sedative in effect.
Another way we keep the clatter down is by trying to make
it coherent, trying to give it the same dramatic shape we give
to our dreams; in other words by making up stories.
All of us make up stories.
Some of us , if we are write rs, write these stories down, concentrate on them. worry them , revise them , throw them away
and retrieve them and revise them again, focus on them all of

JOAN DIDION

our attention. all of our emotion , rende r them into ohjects.
It is very common for writers to think of their work as a
collection of objects. A novel, to a writer , is an object. A story
or an essay is an object. Every piece of work has its own shape ,
its own texture , its own specific gravity. This perception of the
work as an object is not usually shared by the reader of it, and
seems to be one of the principal differe nces between writers
and people in other lines of sedation.
The point of making the object is to give the clatter a shape ,
to find the figure in the carpet, the order in the disorder.
Robert Penn Warren once described fiction as "an attempt,
however modest and limited, to make sense of experience, to
understand how things hang meaningfully together."
Joseph Heller d escribed the conception of Catch-22 this way:
"1 was lying in bed when suddenly this line came to me: 'It
was love at first sight. The first time he saw the chaplain X
fell madly in love with him.' " The " X" turned out to be
Yossarian, but Heller didn 't have the name, didn ' t even know
that this "X" was in the Army. "The chaplain wasn 't necessarily
an Army chaplain," he said. "He could have bee n a prison
chaplain. I don't understand the process of imagination though
I know that I am very much at its mercy. The ideas come to
me in the course of a controlled daydream, a directed reverie. "
Cocteau described his work as deriving from a "a profound
indolence, a somnolence in which we indulge ourselves like
invalids who try to prolong dreams."
Saul Bellow said, when someone asked him what he thought
about winning the Nobel Prize , " I don't know , I haven't written
about it."
There you are. I have never heard a more succinct statement
of the way writers think. The act of writing is for a writer the
process of thinking, o f plugging into that electrical field of image
and making an object out of the tlash and the clatter.
[ don't mean at all that this object comes "naturally" , any
more than a piece of sculpture comes " naturally". You don ' t
find a novel or a story lying around in your unconscious like
a piece of driftwood. You have to hammer it, work it, find the
particular grain of it.
Nor do I mean to say that we write out of our "ex perience" ,

whatev e r that means. Sumt'olle is always saying to yount; \\,Titers
that they should "write from experience" ..\s it happens [ get
copies of a lot of composition te xtbooks. and the worst of them
feature sample " themes" , sample papers written u n "The Night
Fresno Beat Bakersfield" or "The Day I Learned I Made AllState Tackle".
These textbooks present the sample theme , and the n they show
ways the theme might be improved, usually by inventing some
kind of "ac tion" lead, something along the lines of "The clock
was running . The ball was arcing into Fresno territory ."
The trouble with this is that it is based on a very limited and
literal view of experience . The advice that a writer write from
experience is obviously good advice, but it is advice devoid of
real meaning, since it does not define experience, or defines it
as something that happened, as having actually been on the
fifty-yard-line on the night Fresno beat Bakersfield.
Experience is something quite different. Joseph C onrad wrote
his great South American novel , Nostrorno , out of "experience,"
and yet he had never in his life set foot in South America. He
had once, as a very young man, shipped on a freighter that called
at a few ports on the west coast of Mexico, had been told a
story in one of them , and-out of those few hours ashore in Mexico
20 or 25 years before-he had made that nov e l that remains
today all anyone needs to know in o rder to apprehend South
America.
Henry James addressed himself to this question of experience.
He answers a contemporary who advised that "a young lady
brought up in a quiet country village should avoid descriptions
of garrison life" by saying, in effect, no , not at all, you have
it wrong. A young lady brought up in a quiet coun try village
can apprehend eve rything about gar rison life by g lancing once
through a window of Knightsbridge Barracks in London . Hand this was of course James' famous phrase-she is "one of
the people on whom nothing is lost." Let me quote James:

I reme mber a n English novelist.
tell ing me that s he was much
commended for the impression she had managed to give in one o f
he r ta les of the nature and way of life o f French Protestant youth.

J0-\N DIDIO\!

i '!.7

Sht' had tW t' n asked wh e re she It' arned so milch abo ut this reco ndit e
heing, s he had bet'n cOllgratlilatt'd u n ht'r pec uliar o ppo rtunitie s.
These opportunities consisted ()f he r having o [1<:e , in Paris. as she
a scended a sta ircase , p assed an o p e n door where so me o f the you ng
Pro testants w ere seated at a tab le round a finish e d meal. The glimpse
made a pi c ture; it laste d on ly a mo m e nt. but that moment was
experience.

"That moment was experience ."
We have all had such mom e nts.
We retrieve them from that field of image that assaults us every
day we live.
In the spring of 1975 I was teaching at Berkeley, just for a
month and just one class, which met two days a week from 4
to 6 in the afternoon . I was in the middle of writing a novel
that spring, and all day I would sit in my room at the Faculty
Club. This room was just a room : twin beds, a desk, a straightbacked chair and a rented typewriter. I would get up very early
and go out for breakfast and then I would come back to this
room and sit at the desk and make up the novel. Tell myself
the story. Entrance myself, in the literal sense of the word
" entrance. "
Then at night a curious thing would happen. I would go out
to dinner , or to a lecture, and I w o uld listen to people talk about
novels.
Everywhere I went, people were talking about nove ls.
Finished novels. Famous novels.
Just on the face of it, this was intimidating in the extreme:
the main thing a writer wants to kee p out of his or her mind
is the idea that anybody else has ever writt e n a novel.
But it was intimidating for another reason as well.
Everyone to whom I was listening at Berkeley that spring
talked about novels as if the nove list-whethe r it was Dic kens
or George Eliot or Scott Fitzgerald-had known precisely what
he or she w as doing before se tting out, as if the novel were
schematic, and e ntire ly planned.
If this was true , th en I was in bad trouble.
I particularly rem e mber a kind of amiable argum e nt I was
havin g one night with some people from the English Oepart-

:-):">8

THE \IlCHIC .-\;-J Vl.:.\HTFHLY HE\IE\\'

ment. Someone had llIentioned The Last Ty{'()on. and everyone
\vas pointing o ut ways in which it didn't work, ways in \vhich
it seemed to them a t1agrantly bad novel.
There was the " imbalance" of it.
There was the rather creaking deus ex machina aspect to the
plot.
I didn't disagree with anything they said, but I still thought
that The Last TlJcoon was a brilliant piece of work, and they
didn't.
Finally I realized what the argument was about, what the
difference in our thinking was, and it was quite a radical difference . They were looking at The Last TlJcoon not as a fragment
of a novel in progress but as the first third of a novel for which
we were simply missing the last two-thirds. In other words they
saw that first third as completed, frozen , dosed-the interrupted
execution of a fully articulated plan on Fitzgerald's part-and
I saw it as something fluid , something that would change as
he discovered where the book was taking him.
They saw a novel as a plan carried out.
I saw a novel as an object discovered.
They saw the process as an act of intelligence.
I saw it as a mystery.
They saw the writer as someone who has a story to tell and
writes it down .
I saw the writer as someone who discovers the story only in
the act of making it up.
The novel I was working on during that spring in Berkeley
had begun in 1971 as a book about a woman who was traveling
through Mississippi and Louisiana with her ex-husband . who
was dying . The novel was to take place entirely in motel rooms
off interstate highways.
In Holiday Inns. in Ramada Inns. In Howard Johnson's.
It was to be a novel without ev e nt.
It was to be told in a flat third person .
By the time I was working on this novel in Berkeley in
1975-the novel was A. Book of Common Prayer-it had take n
quite a different shape . It had become a novel which too k place
largely in a Central American republic named Boca Grande

J()\\i UIDlO:'-i

and-far from lwing without e vt'llt - in\'ld \' ed hombings. a
highjacking, a revolution and a Ilumber of other theatrical-not
to say melodramatic-events. And it was told not in that "nat
third person" but in the first person, by a sixty-year-old woman
named Grace Strasser-Mendana, born Grace Tabor in Denver,
Colorado. Grace Tabor went down to Latin America as an
anthropologist. Grace Tabor retired as an anthropologist and
married into the Strasser-Mendana family, which ran Boca
Grande . Grace Tabor was dying of pancreatic cancer, and she
was to tell us the story of the woman who traveled with her
ex-husband through Mississippi and Louisiana.
You could call this telling the story the hard way. I would
call it telling myself a story that incorporated all of the images
I was getting at the time.
Once in the late Sixties I took a series of psychiatric tests,
one of which was the Thematic Apperception Test. The Thematic Apperception Test, or "TAT," is the one in which the subject
is shown a series of drawings and asked to make up a story
based on each drawing. I recall resisting this test. I remember
telling the doctor that of course I could make up stories, but
he would be misguided to think that he knew more about what
the stories revealed than I did, because I made up stories for
a living.
He persisted, and I took the test.
One of the pictures was of a woman , not smiling, standing
on some kind of raised ground-alone-and gazing down to
where a group of men were ve ry busy building a bridge or a
culvert or maybe just tilling a field , some kind of basic physical
work.
I remember that the story I made up to "go " with this drawing
had to do with an American woman who had become involved
with the revolutionary forces in Cuba during the early days of
the revolution, and had since become disillusioned , and isolated
in Cuba.
The doctor of course wanted to know "why " she was disillusioned , and I remember saying quite sharply " because that's
the story I'm telling you. "
We didn 't get much further than that-we were proceeding,

:):30

THE ~tICHIG:\N QU.\HTERLY HE\'lEW

after all, from radically different points of view-hilt in fact
[ was more interested in this story than in any of the other stories
[ made up that day, and it occurred to me some years later,
when I was making up the story that had begun as a trip through
Mississippi and Louisiana and had evolved into a revolution
in Central America, that the story had actually been in my mind
for all that time.
I am going to read you some of the notes I made during the
time that this novel about the trip through the South was in
the process of evolving into A Book of Common Praljer. These
notes were all in certain notebooks I had, and I am going to
give them to you in the order in which they were made.
She goes out to the airport and watches the planes take off.
Arousing uneasy glances in the Panama airport, out there in
the morning when the midnight Avianca from Mexico comes
in. Drinking tea in the coffee shop at the Cartagena airport,
making them boil the water before she will put the tea bag
in.
Arrival of mail, magazines, seed catalogues. Projects to make
money and fame. Correspondents. Walking downtown in
Cartagena in the midday blaze. Cracks and ruts in the sidewalk. Dinner alone in the CapilIa del Mar.
Unfitted for the heat. Frequent fevers, illness, occasional
unsatisfactory liaisons with locals, who misapprehend her.
IF THIS IS THE FRAME FOR THE SOUTHERN STORY
THEN THE SOUTH MUST HAVE UNHINGED HER IN
CERT AIN KEY WAYS.
During the troubles in Boca Grande she dreamwalks her way
into danger. Incapable of believing that it can touch her. Una
norteamericana. Self-delusion. Herded into the bull ring.
Argument with local druggist or doctor during bout of fever.
Paregorina.
The Miami Herald is what she reads.
Official functions, rum and quinine. Whenever the USIS man
is invited. so is she.

Jo.\~

DIDLON

jJ 1

SOUTH .\\tERIC.\N P.\HT 1'\1 PHESENT TE'\ISE, SOUTH
LN P'\ST~ \IA YBE TWO NOVELL.\S, PUBLISHED TOGETHER?
Death very casual.
FIRST LINE: HERE IS WHAT HAPPENED.
FIRST CHAPTER HARD THIRD SUMMARY. THEN ALTERNATING CHAPTERS. LAST CHAPTER SOUTH
AMERICAN BUT BEGINS: "WHEN IT HAPPENED . . . "
VERY HARD LINE THIRD PERSON.
WHO IS THE THIRD PERSON? MAYBE YOU DON'T
KNOW WHO IT IS UNTIL 2/3 THROUGH?
"'HERE IS WHAT HAPPENED: SHE LEFT THE FIRST
MAN, SHE LEFT THE FIRST CHILD, SHE WENT TO
THE SECOND MAN, SHE LOST THE SECOND CHILD,
SHE DIED. IN SUMMARY. SO YOU KNOW THE STORY.
IN F ACT THE STORY HAD COMPLICATIONS, BUT ONLY
FOR THE LIVING. IF YOU HAVE EVER MADE THEM
BOIL THE WATER TWENTY MINUTES BEFORE YOU
PUT THE TEABAG IN YOU WILL KNOW WHAT I MEAN.
FEVER IS RAMPANT."
Cataloguing the flora and fauna. Writing to the British resident
in Honiara, Guadalcanal. Reading the Pacific Islands Monthly.
Devising a scheme to ship Christmas trees to Caracas.
When the ice melted in the Thermos bottles in the hotel rooms
it left flecks of white in the water. She imagined as she drank
it that the flecks were the salmonella typhosa, salmonella
paratyphosa, salmonella shigella, but of course she knew that
you could not see bacteria with the naked eye. Unless your
eyes were very good.
She is always planning to go home. She takes lessons in
Spanish, Castilian Spanish, from a very old woman.
Since the inception of the Nobel Prize in science there has
been only one given to a South American. This was given
to an Argentinian doctor in 1947. Later, under Peronist charges
of incompetence, he resigned from the university.

j:3:2

THE \lICHIC.-\;\.i QUAH.TEHLY HEnEW

The .\rgentinian neurosurgeon \\·ho cannot practice in New
York or Buenos Aires. :\t the family compounds his wife is
stopped at the gate by his brother, with a machine gun.
Kidnapping insurance. His brother tries on military helmets
all day, and on visits to New York tries to sell vicuna blankets.
The illuminated Christ on the hillside had been the idea,
but there was no hillside in Boca Grande, was no hill. The
Opera, the Botanical Garden, the race track, the Jockey Club.
The sentries with tommy guns patrolling the presidential
palace.
Asylum was available in Boca Grande, but no deposed president had ever availed himself of it.
The preference for speaking French among Boca Grande's
three or four first families. The money in European banks.
American oil, the National City Bank, Brown Brothers Harriman, United Fruit.
American covers. Americans come down to do"research," come
in "study groups," to study "behavioral patterns."
There had once been a railroad line built in Boca Grande
but the contracts for its construction had been let to two
competing companies, and upon completion it was found that
they had built track of different gauges, so the track went
unused and grew over.
The prescription for depression is "removal to a hill station,"
but we have no hill stations in Boca Grande.
LA REPUBLICA DE BOCA GRANDE: a Spanish colony from
1525 to 1823. Independent since 1942. 28 constitutions as
an independent nation. When Boca Grande was a Spanish
colony it was governed from Guatemala City or Colombia
by a captaincy general. Brief period as one of the United
Provinces of Central America. :\ member of the United Nations,
the OAS, and the Central American Common Market. Myriad
aid offices with acronyms, all the American ones plus the
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and
the Central American Bank for Economic Integration. In the
early nineteenth century Boca Grande resisted an annexation
attempt by Mexico. Gastrointestinal infection is the leading

JOA N DIJ)[O N
natllral calise of d eath . Ra in y season froI1l Jlllle to O ctobe r.
Th e re is no thing left of Boca Cra nde's col o nia l pe riod beca use
o f an earthquake in 1900
Le t me describe C harl o tte's appea ran ce . Find the c haracter
clues he re . A wo man o f medium hei g ht, extre me a nd vo la tile
thinness , a pronounced pallor, and pal e red hair w'hi ch curl ed
in the damp heat and sta nds o ut aro und he r face. S he h as
a te nde ncy to drop he r head s lightl y, as if the we ight o f he r
hair is more than she can ca rry. H e r body has a te nde ncy
to retain w ater and s ince adol escence she has tak en a diureti c,
but has bee n to ld not to ta ke it in the tropics, so tha t whe n
she is tired he r ankles see m thi ck. Her expression sta rtles
b y its o penl1ess, as if she se es som eone abo ut to hit ~er. She
is 40 yea rs o ld but this nak ed and ra the r unfinished e xpressio n
gives the impression of a so mewhat younge r w o man. She w ears
expensive shoes an d the care less o bserve r might take he r to
b e va in abo ut he r feet, but this is not so : in fact s he believes
her fee t ugly and tries to hide the m whe n she is seated . She
has for 15 ye ars carrie d the sa me H e rmes handbag, day and
eve nin g, now in n eed of re pair but the life tim e guarantee
is useless in Boca Grande and sh e will not s pend mone y to
have it re pa ired, be cause it is gua ranteed . This is the ki nd
o f conundrum she fre ts over. She wears e xpe ns ive discree t
clothes which o n he r man age to look flamboyant , and there
is a lways so me thing slightl y ask ew : a h em a bo ut to co me
o ut , a seam with a quarter-inc h split , a minute stubbo rn stain,
a trace of po wder o n the c hiffon blouse. What is thi s w o man
doing in Boca G rande?
\Ve ll, o f course, there it w a s: there w as the ques tion I had
to answe r. There w a s the " s to ry ." Wha t was thi s w o man d o in g
in Boc a G rande .
Durin g the time I spe nt answer in g that qu esti o n , m a kin g up
the s to ry, I lived in Boca G rande . E ve ry th i n g I h e ard o r saw
or th o ught about-all the clatte r, all th e images-was fr a med by
this imag inary c ountry , b y th e li ght the re , the we a the r the re .
F o r a lo n g tim e afte r I finish e d that nove l, I co ntinued li v ing
in Boca G rande . I couldn ' t le t it go . I knew too muc h a b out
it. I kne w fo r exampl e h o w to run a co pra pl a ntation , I had
taught m yse lf h o w . I kne w th a t if yo u try to cfO v... d 200 p a lms

:-) ~H

THE \llClIIC :\~ QU .\RTERLY REVI EW

tu the acre you are going to ge t a luw vield, I knew !lot to plant
near salt water, 1 knew about the particular varieties of scale
and fungus that afflict coconut palms.
In other words I had , for a while, made the world hang
meaningfully together, made all the images coherent, and it was
hard to give that up.
It is still.
So I am making up another story .
And teaching myself the economics of the sugar business.

(Hopwood Lecture, 1979)

