movements and always quietly and calmly let the horns pass him close each time. He did not have to emphasize their closeness. Brett saw how something that was beautiful done close to the bull was ridiculous if it were done a little way off. I told her how since the death of Joselito all the bull-fighters had been developing a technic that simulated this appearance of danger in order to give a fake emotional feeling, while the bull-fighter was really safe. Romero had the old thing, the holding of his purity of line through the maximum of exposure, while he dominated the bull by making him realize he was unattainable, while he prepared him for the killing. “I’ve never seen him do an awkward thing,” Brett said. “You won’t until he gets frightened,” I said. “He’ll never be frightened,” Mike said. “He knows too damned much.” “He knew everything when he started. The others can’t ever learn what he was born with.” “And God, what looks,” Brett said. “I believe, you know, that she’s falling in love with this bull-fighter chap,” Mike said. “I wouldn’t be surprised.” “Be a good chap, Jake. Don’t tell her anything more about him. Tell her how they beat their old mothers.” “Tell me what drunks they are.” “Oh, frightful,” Mike said. “Drunk all day and spend all their time beating their poor old mothers.” “He looks that way,” Brett said. “Doesn’t he?” I said. They had hitched the mules to the dead bull and then the whips cracked, the men ran, and the mules, straining forward, their legs pushing, broke into a gallop, and the bull, one horn up, his head on its side, swept a swath smoothly across the sand and out the red gate. “This next is the last one.” “Not really,” Brett said. She leaned forward on the barrera. Romero waved his picadors to their places, then stood, his cape against his chest, looking across the ring to where the bull would come out. After it was over we went out and were pressed tight in the crowd. “These bull-fights are hell on one,” Brett said. “I’m limp as a rag.” “Oh, you’ll get a drink,” Mike said. The next day Pedro Romero did not fight. It was Miura bulls, and a very bad bull-fight. The next day there was no bull-fight scheduled. But all day and all night the fiesta kept on. CHAPTER 16 In the morning it was raining. A fog had come over the mountains from the sea. You could not see the tops of the mountains. The plateau was dull and gloomy, and the shapes of the trees and the houses were changed. I walked out beyond the town to look at the weather. The bad weather was coming over the mountains from the sea. The flags in the square hung wet from the white poles and the banners were wet and hung damp against the front of the houses, and in between the steady drizzle the rain came down and drove every one under the arcades and made pools of water in the square, and the streets wet and dark and deserted; yet the fiesta kept up without any pause. It was only driven under cover. The covered seats of the bull-ring had been crowded with people sitting out of the rain watching the concourse of Basque and Navarrais dancers and singers, and afterward the Val Carlos dancers in their costumes danced down the street in the rain, the drums sounding hollow and damp, and the chiefs of the bands riding ahead on their big, heavy-footed horses, their costumes wet, the horses’ coats wet in the rain. The crowd was in the cafés and the dancers came in, too, and sat, their tight-wound white legs under the tables, shaking the water from their belled caps, and spreading their red and purple jackets over the chairs to dry. It was raining hard outside. I left the crowd in the café and went over to the hotel to get shaved for dinner. I was shaving in my room when there was a knock on the door. “Come in,” I called. Montoya walked in. “How are you?” he said. “Fine,” I said. “No bulls to-day.” “No,” I said, “nothing but rain.” “Where are your friends?” “Over at the Iruña.” Montoya smiled his embarrassed smile. “Look,” he said. “Do you know the American ambassador?” “Yes,” I said. “Everybody knows the American ambassador.” “He’s here in town, now.” “Yes,” I said. “Everybody’s seen them.” “I’ve seen them, too,” Montoya said. He didn’t say anything. I went on shaving. “Sit down,” I said. “Let me send for a drink.” “No, I have to go.” I finished shaving and put my face down into the bowl and washed it with cold water. Montoya was standing there looking more embarrassed. “Look,” he said. “I’ve just had a message from them at the Grand Hotel that they want Pedro Romero and Marcial Lalanda to come over for coffee to-night after dinner.” “Well,” I said, “it can’t hurt Marcial any.” “Marcial has been in San Sebastian all day. He drove over in a car this morning with Marquez. I don’t think they’ll be back to-night.” Montoya stood embarrassed. He wanted me to say something. “Don’t give Romero the message,” I said. “You think so?” “Absolutely.” Montoya was very pleased. “I wanted to ask you because you were an American,” he said. “That’s what I’d do.” “Look,” said Montoya. “People take a boy like that. They don’t know what he’s worth. They don’t know what he means. Any foreigner can flatter him. They start this Grand Hotel business, and in one year they’re through.” “Like Algabeno,” I said. “Yes, like Algabeno.” “They’re a fine lot,” I said. “There’s one American woman down here now that collects bull-fighters.” “I know. They only want the young ones.” “Yes,” I said. “The old ones get fat.” “Or crazy like Gallo.” “Well,” I said, “it’s easy. All you have to do is not give him the message.” “He’s such a fine boy,” said Montoya. “He ought to stay with his own people. He shouldn’t mix in that stuff.” “Won’t you have a drink?” I asked. “No,” said Montoya, “I have to go.” He went out. I went down-stairs and out the door and took a walk around through the arcades around the square. It was still raining. I looked in at the Iruña for the gang and they were not there, so I walked on around the square and back to the hotel. They were eating dinner in the down-stairs dining-room. They were well ahead of me and it was no use trying to catch them. Bill was buying shoe-shines for Mike. Bootblacks opened the street door and each one Bill called over and started to work on Mike. “This is the eleventh time my boots have been polished,” Mike said. “I say, Bill is an ass.” The bootblacks had evidently spread the report. Another came in. “Limpia botas?” he said to Bill. “No,” said Bill. “For this Señor.” The bootblack knelt down beside the one at work and started on Mike’s free shoe that shone already in the electric light. “Bill’s a yell of laughter,” Mike said. I was drinking red wine, and so far behind them that I felt a little uncomfortable about all this shoe-shining. I looked around the room. At the next table was Pedro Romero. He stood up when I nodded, and asked me to come over and meet a friend. His table was beside ours, almost touching. I met the friend, a Madrid bull-fight critic, a little man with a drawn face. I told Romero how much I liked his work, and he was very pleased. We talked Spanish and the critic knew a little French. I reached to our table for my wine-bottle, but the critic took my arm. Romero laughed. “Drink here,” he said in English. He was very bashful about his English, but he was really very pleased with it, and as we went on talking he brought out words he was not sure of, and asked me about them. He was anxious to know the English for _Corrida de toros_, the exact translation. Bull-fight he was suspicious of. I explained that bull-fight in Spanish was the _lidia_ of a _toro_. The Spanish word _corrida_ means in English the running of bulls—the French translation is _Course de taureaux_. The critic put that in. There is no Spanish word for bull-fight. Pedro Romero said he had learned a little English in Gibraltar. He was born in Ronda. That is not far above Gibraltar. He started bull-fighting in Malaga in the bull-fighting school there. He had only been at it three years. The bull-fight critic joked him about the number of _Malagueño_ expressions he used. He was nineteen years old, he said. His older brother was with him as a banderillero, but he did not live in this hotel.